Zach Walters, alias Jungle Boy, (born February 4, 1981) is an American former professional boxer who competed from 2002 to 2009, holding the African and NABA light heavyweight titles. Walters is now a boxing trainer and promoter. He owns the Jungle Boy Boxing Gym, a non-profit organization in Duluth and promotes fights as Jungle Boy Fights. ==Personal life== Zach Walters was born in Taolagnaro, Madagascar, and spent the first eleven years of his life in the country as the son of missionary parents. He now calls Duluth, Minnesota, his home. ==Professional career== Walters' professional career began on June 7, 2002, with a first round TKO victory over Lonzie Pembleton. The fight was part of a show staged at Wade Stadium in Duluth, Minnesota. After five wins to open his career, Walters suffered his first career loss to Robert Linton by unanimous decision. Another victory for the 'Jungle Boy' earned a shot at the vacant Minnesota Light Heavyweight State Title, where Walters (7-1) defeated Marty Lindquist (11-3) by Round 2 TKO. Walters strung together ten-straight wins before losing again to Hugo Pineda (38-3-1) in November 2006. Walters soldiered on and after six-consecutive wins to earn a shot at the vacant African light-heavyweight title. Walters' original announced opponent was Marlon Hayes, but Hayes pulled out and was replaced by veteran Carl Daniels (50-11-1). The fight took place on February 23, 2008, and resulted in an 8th round TKO win for Walters. On June 7, 2008, Walters defeated Aaron Norwood by second round knockout. In so doing, Walters claimed his second regional title, the vacant NABA United States Light Heavyweight belt. The victory improved Walters pro record to 23-2. In August 2008 Walters lost to tough journeyman Shawn Hammack (16-6-2) in a bout that he seemed to be well on his way to winning, getting caught in the final round and stopped with 30 seconds to go. Another loss followed to Byron Mitchell (26-4-1) in February 2009 for the NABA United States Light Heavyweight title. Walters returned four months later to win in Duluth, but after a December 2009 loss to Larry Sharpe by 1st round TKO he announced his retirement. Walters' career record was 24-5 with 19 wins by knockout. ==References== ==External links== * * Jungle Boy Boxing Gym Category:1981 births Category:Living people Category:American male boxers Category:Light-heavyweight boxers Category:African Boxing Union champions Category:Boxers from Minnesota Category:People from Anosy Category:Sportspeople from Duluth, Minnesota