Zerezindo (533/34 – 30 July 578) was a Visigothic dux (duke), probably of Baetica, where he was buried.He may have been a Byzantine doux, but probably not, according to Paul Goubert, "L'Espagne byzantine. Administration de l'Espagne byzantine, II. Influences byzantines religieuses et politiques sur l'Espagne wisigothique" Revue des études byzantines 4 (1946), 72. Retrieved 16 May 2013. His funerary inscription was found in the house once belonging to Juan Álvarez de Bohorques in Villamartín in Écija. It reads:Ernst Willibald Emil Hübner (1871), Inscriptiones Hispaniae christianae edidit Aemilius Hübner: adiecta est tabula geographica (G. Reimerum), 26. Α ✝ Ω ZEREZINDO · DVX · FD VIXIT ANNOS PLVS MINVS XLIIII · OBIT · III · KAL · AG ERA · D · C · XVI The first line of the inscription, a symbol of Jesus Christ, shows the Greek letters alpha and omega on either side of a cross. The rest of the inscription reads "Zerezindo, duke, FD, lived forty-four years and died on the 3 kalends of August of the Era 616." The interpretation of "FD" has eluded scholars. Rodrigo Caro and Fray Christoval de San Antonio read it as filius ducis, "son of the duke", implying that Zerezindo's father was also a duke. Juan Francisco Masdeu reads it as Famulus Dei, "servant of God", and cites the inscription of a certain Exuperantius from the same year near Frexenal.Juan Francisco Masdeu (1791), Historia critica de España, y de la Cultura Española (A. de Sancha), 361-2. It has also been interpreted as an abbreviation for fidelis, "faithful one, loyal one [of the king]". The most interesting fact about Zerezindo is his Germanic name and the implication of his headstone that he was a Catholic at a time when most Visigoths were Arian Christians.E. A. Thompson (1960), "The Conversion of the Visigoths to Catholicism," Nottingham Mediaeval Studies, 4, 8 n19. This is especially noteworthy considering his high rank; a Catholic Goth had managed to ascend to the uppermost military rank in an Arian noble society.E. A. Thompson (1969), The Goths in Spain (Oxford: Clarendon Press), 37n. Etymologically, Zerezindo's interesting name attests to his probable Gothic identity.Though it is possible he was a Hispano-Roman--they were mostly Catholics--with a Germanic name. His name has been normalised as Seresind (Seresindus).Adalbert Kuhn (1872), Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung auf dem Gebiete der indogermanischen Sprachen (Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht), 435. The Germanic root of its first component may be swērs ("swear");Gerhard Köbler (1989), Gotisches Wörterbuch (BRILL), 707. or perhaps skari ("band").Moritz Goldschmidt (1887), Zur Kritik der altgermanischen Elemente im spanischen (Druck von J. L. v. d. Velde Veldmann), 60. The latter component comes from swinþs/ô ("strength"). ==Notes== Category:578 deaths Category:6th-century people of the Visigothic Kingdom Category:Year of birth uncertain