Zeta Sigma Chi () (also known as Z-Chis, pronounced "Zeek eyes") is a multicultural American sorority founded in 1991 at the Northern Illinois University in DeKalb, Illinois.Lurding, Carroll and Becque, Fran. (December 3, 2022) Almanac of Fraternities and Sororities. Urbana: University of Illinois. Accessed December 23, 2022. It was the third national multicultural organization founded in the United States. == History == On March 3, 1991, Zeta Sigma Chi Multicultural Sorority Inc. was established at Northern Illinois University by eight founding members known as the Mommy Chis. The Mommy Chis are Maribel Campa, Zandra Cortes, Sandra de la Roca, Veronica Escobar, Sandra Gomez, Jacqueline Herrera, Laura Murillo, and Julie Sanders. Zeta Sigma Chi is based upon five principles. The organization's principles are sisterhood, multiculturalism, education, community service, and social justice. The Oakland University Office for Student Involvement selected its Zeta Sigma Chi chapter as the Fraternity & Sorority Life Organization of the Year for the 2019–2020 academic year. === Symbols === Zeta Sigma Chi's colors are peach and black. Its flower is the peach rose and its symbol is the unicorn. Its motto is "Keeping the Dream Alive." == Activities == The sorority's philanthropies are the Ronald McDonald House Charities and the National Association for Multicultural Education (NAME). The Eastern Michigan University chapter hosts an annual SexapalooZa to encourage positive discussion and education about healthy and safe sex. The University of Michigan chapter held a workshop to discuss homophobia in the Greek system. == Chapters == Chapter Chartered/Range Institution Location Status Reference Alpha Northern Illinois University DeKalb, IL Active Beta University of Wisconsin–Whitewater Whitewater, WI Active Gamma Purdue University Northwest Calumet, IN Active Delta Michigan State University East Lansing, MI Active Epsilon University of Michigan Ann Arbor, MI Active Zeta Towson University Towson, MD Active Eta University of Texas at Austin Austin, TX Active Theta University of Maryland, Baltimore County Baltimore County, MD Active Iota Shippensburg University Shippensburg, PA Active Kappa Wayne State University Detroit, MI Active Lambda Oakland University Oakland County, MI Active Mu University of Wisconsin–Parkside Kenosha, WI Active Nu Purdue University West Lafayette, IN Active Xi University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA Active Omicron Eastern Michigan University Ypsilanti, MI Active Pi California State University, Sacramento Sacramento, CA Active Rho University of South Carolina Columbia, SC Active Sigma University of California, Davis Davis, CA Active Tau University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee Milwaukee, WI Active Upsilon California State University, East Bay Hayward, CA Active Omega Reserved for deceased sisters Memorial CSU Chico California State University, Chico Chico, CA Active Winthrop University Associate Winthrop University Rock Hill, SC Active == References == Category:Student organizations established in 1991 Category:Student societies in the United States Category:1991 establishments in Illinois