Ze'ev RechterA Place in History: Modernism, Tel Aviv, and the Creation of Jewish Urban Space, Part 2 by Barbara E. Mann. Stanford University Press, 2006, p. 162.] (1899–1960) () was a pioneering architect of Mandate Palestine and Israel, who designed many of Israel's iconic buildings. He is considered one of the three founding fathers of Israeli architecture, along with Dov Karmi and Arieh Sharon. Among his works, Rechter designed Binyanei HaUma (International Convention Center in Jerusalem), the Tel Aviv courthouse and the Mann Auditorium (together with Karmi). He introduced the use of stilt columns known as piloti in residential housing in Israel.A room with a view of Israel of old, Haaretz ==Biography== Rechter was born in the Russian Empire. He immigrated to Mandate Palestine at the age of 20. His first job was measuring the land that became Allenby Street. In 1924, he designed Beit Hakadim (the "Urn House"), on the corner of Nahalat Binyamin and Rambam streets, named for the large vases on its cornices. In 1926 he went to Rome to study architecture, but a shortage of money forced him and his family to return to Palestine. In 1927 he designed a residence for the poet Esther Raab on HaGalil Street (today Mapu street) in a fledgling modernist style inspired by his impressions from Italy. The house was later demolished.Nitza Metzger- Szmuk, Des Maisons sur Le Sable - Tel Aviv - Mouvement Moderne et Esprit Bauhaus, Éditions de l'éclat, Paris, 2004. In 1929 he went to the École des Ponts et Chaussées in Paris to further his studies. It was then that he became an enthusiastic disciple of Le Corbusier. Upon his return, he settled in Tel Aviv and founded the Hug group of architects together with Arieh Sharon and Josef Neufeld, who had also returned from studies and work in Europe.Sliding up the Rechter scale, Haaretz Rechter died in 1960. The Beersheeba Municipal Conservatory was built many years later, in 1975, following designs by Rechter and Moshe Zarhy. ===Family=== Rechter was married to Paula Singer, with whom he had three children: Yaakov, who also became an architect, and two daughters, Aviva and Tuti.Sliding up the Rechter scale, Haaretz ==Gallery== File:Angel house.jpg|Engel House, Tel Aviv (1934) File:Binyanei- HaUmah.JPG|Binianey HaUma, Jerusalem (1950) File:Fredric R. Mann Auditorium- Tel Aviv-2.jpg|Mann Auditorium (1951) File:Charles Bronfman Auditorium 2013 05 01.jpg|Mann Auditorium, Tel Aviv, Zeev Rechter and Dov Karmi, 1951 File:PikiWiki Israel 13327 Beersheeba Municipal Conservatory.jpg|Beersheeba Municipal Conservatory (1975) ==References== Category:1899 births Category:1960 deaths Category:Israeli Jews Category:Israeli people of Ukrainian-Jewish descent Category:Ukrainian Jews Category:Architects in Mandatory Palestine Category:Israeli architects Category:Modernist architects Category:Jewish architects Category:Burials at Nahalat Yitzhak Cemetery Category:Soviet emigrants to Mandatory Palestine