Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan (; 6 May 1918 – 2 November 2004) was an Arab politician, statesman, and philanthropist who founded the United Arab Emirates. Zayed served as the governor of Eastern Region from 1946 until he succeeded Sheikh Shakhbut as the ruler of Abu Dhabi in 1966, and then as the first president of the United Arab Emirates while he retained his position as Abu Dhabi's ruler from 1971 until his death in 2004. He is revered in the UAE as the Waalid al-Ummah ("Father of the Nation"), credited for being the principal driving force behind uniting seven emirates. Zayed replaced his older brother Sheikh Shakhbut bin Sultan as the ruler of Abu Dhabi on 6 August 1966 after Shakhbut was deposed through a bloodless coup by members of the ruling family with British support. ==Family and early life== Zayed was the youngest of four sons of Sheikh Sultan bin Khalifa Al Nahyan. His father was the ruler of Abu Dhabi from 1922 until his death in 1926. Zayed was the youngest of his four brothers. His eldest brother, Sheikh Shakhbut bin Sultan Al Nahyan, became ruler of Abu Dhabi after their uncle, Saqr bin Zayed Al Nahyan. His mother was Sheikha Salama bint Butti. She extracted a promise from her sons not to use violence against each other, a promise which they kept. Sheikh Zayed was named after his grandfather, Sheikh Zayed bin Khalifa Al Nahyan ("Zayed the Great"), who ruled the emirate from 1855 to 1909. At the time of Sheikh Zayed's birth, the sheikhdom of Abu Dhabi was one of seven Trucial States along the lower coast of the Persian Gulf. He also showed interest in falconry. It is normally held that he was born at Qasr al-Hosn in Abu Dhabi, with some sources stating that he was born in Al Ain, particularly at Sultan Bin Zayed Fort on the edge of Al Ain Oasis. He is at least known to have moved from Abu Dhabi to Al Ain in 1927, after the death of his father. As Zayed was growing up in Al-Ain, there were no modern schools anywhere along the coast. He only received a basic instruction in the principles of Islam, and lived in the desert with Bedouin tribesmen, familiarising himself with the life of the people, their traditional skills and their ability to survive under the harsh climatic conditions.UAEU Bio ==Career and reign== Zayed was appointed the governor of the Eastern Region of Abu Dhabi in 1946, and was based in the Muwaiji fort in Al Ain. At this time, the area was poor and prone to outbreaks of disease. When parties from Petroleum Development (Trucial Coast) began exploring for oil in the area, Zayed assisted them. In 1952, a small Saudi Arabian force led by Turki bin Abdullah Al-Otaishan occupied the village of Hamasa in the Buraimi Oasis (the 'Buraimi Dispute'). Zayed was prominent in his opposition to Saudi territorial claims and reportedly rejected a bribe of about £30 million to allow Aramco to explore for oil in the disputed territory. As part of this dispute, Zayed and his brother Hazza attended the Buraimi arbitration tribunal in Geneva in September 1955 and gave evidence to tribunal members. When the tribunal was abandoned amid allegations of Saudi bribery, the British initiated the reoccupation of the Buraimi Oasis through a local military force, the Trucial Oman Levies. A period of stability followed during which Zayed helped to develop the region and took a particular interest in the restoration of the falaj system, a network of water channels which kept the plantations of the Buraimi Oasis irrigated and fertile. The discovery of oil in 1958, and the start of oil exports in 1962, led to frustration among members of the ruling family about the lack of progress under Sheikh Shakhbut's rule. Shakhbut was seen as averse to spending revenue from oil money to develop the emirate by other members of Al Nahyan and hence they requested British help to install Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan as the ruler of Abu Dhabi in his stead through a bloodless coup. On 6 August 1966, Shakhbut was deposed in a bloodless palace coup. The move to replace Shakhbut with Zayed had the unanimous backing of the Al Nahyan family. The news was conveyed to Shakhbut by British Acting Resident Glen Balfour-Paul who added the support of the British to the consensus of the family. Shakhbut finally accepted the decision and, with the Trucial Oman Scouts providing safe transport, left for Bahrain. He subsequently lived in Khorramshahr, Iran before returning to live in Buraimi. In the late 1960s, Zayed hired Katsuhiko Takahashi, a Japanese architect, to design and plan the city of Abu Dhabi.Building a city from the sands The National. 11 September 2008. Retrieved 15 April 2016. Takahashi, working to instructions from Zayed, often marked out in sand with a camel stick, was responsible for a number of key buildings, while also introducing wide roads, the construction of corniches and also greening the city. Another architect, Egyptian Abdulrahman Makhlouf, also worked to render Zayed's instructions into city plans and infrastructural projects following Takahashi's departure. Between 8–11 January 1968, the UK's Foreign Office Minister Goronwy Roberts visited the Trucial States and announced to its shocked rulers that the United Kingdom would abrogate its treaties with them and intended to withdraw from the area. In a seminal meeting on 18 February 1968 at a desert highland on the border between Dubai and Abu Dhabi, Sheikh Zayed and Sheikh Rashid bin Saeed Al Maktoum of Dubai shook hands on the principle of founding a Federation and attempting to invite other trucial rulers to join in order that a viable nation be formed in the wake of the British withdrawal. In 1971, after occasionally difficult negotiations with the other six rulers of the Trucial States, the United Arab Emirates was formed. Zayed was appointed to the presidency of the UAE in 1971 and was reappointed on four more occasions: 1976, 1981, 1986, and 1991. In 1974, Zayed settled the outstanding border dispute with Saudi Arabia by the Treaty of Jeddah by which Saudi Arabia received the output of the Shaybah oilfield and access to the lower Persian Gulf in return for recognising the UAE.Schofield R., Evans K.E. (eds) Arabian Boundaries: New Documents (2009), vol. 15, pp. viii–xv. In 1976 he founded the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority, which grew to be the world's third-largest sovereign investment fund by 2020, with nearly a trillion US dollars' worth of assets under management. ==Attitudes== Sheikh Zayed was determined to unite the Emirates into federation. His calls for cooperation extended across the Persian Gulf to Iran. He advocated dialogue as the means to settle the row with Tehran over three strategic Persian Gulf islands which Iran seized from the (future) UAE Emirate of Sharjah in 1971. The islands remain in Iranian hands, despite over three decades of UAE diplomatic initiatives. The attitude of Zayed towards his neighbors can best be seen in his position regarding the "Umm al Zamul" dispute (1964), when he expressed a genuine wish that his brother Sheikh Shakhbut would accept "the Sultan's proposal for a neutral zone". He said in that regard: "... it was ridiculous to squabble over a [water] well so bitter that few bedouin could stomach its waters, or to split hairs over a tiny area of barren, almost totally unfrequented desert. And even if there happened to be oil in the area, Abu Dhabi had so much already that she could well afford to spare some for her less fortunate neighbours". Furthermore, during the negotiations between Abu Dhabi and Dubai that resulted in forming the Abu Dhabi — Dubai Union (which preceded the formation of the United Arab Emirates), Sheikh Zayed was extremely generous with the Sheikh Rashid of Dubai. Kemal Hamza, Sheikh Rashid's envoy to the meeting between Sheikh Zayed and Sheikh Rashid in Sumeih remarked that "Zayed was extremely 'karim' (generous) throughout the negotiations and seemed prepared to give Rashid whatever he wanted". This amounted to Zayed giving Rashid "oil rights in the sea-bed that might be worth milions a year" even at the risk of criticism "at home for giving so much..." It also gave rise to comments that such concessions constituted "an alienation of territory by Abu Dhabi". But the future course of events proved, none of these arguments stood the test of judgment in light of the much higher goal that Sheikh Zayed had in mind, and which in the ultimate analysis amply justified the sacrifices incurred by him. Such concessions are rare in the records of history and news of this generosity travelled far and wide. He was considered a relatively liberal ruler, and permitted private media. However, they were expected to practice self-censorship and avoid criticism of Zayed or the ruling families. Freedom of worship was permitted, and to a certain extent allowances were made for expatriate cultures, but this did not always sit comfortably in the eyes of the wider Arab world with Zayed's role as a Muslim head of state. Zayed did not shy away from controversy when it came to expressing his opinions on current events in the Arab world. Troubled by the suffering of Iraqi civilians, he took the lead in calling for the lifting of economic sanctions on Iraq imposed by the United Nations in the aftermath of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990, despite Kuwaiti displeasure and opposition. Zayed was one of the wealthiest men in the world. A Forbes estimate put his fortune at around US$20 billion in 2004. The source of this wealth was almost exclusively due to the immense oil wealth of Abu Dhabi and the Emirates, which sit on a pool of a tenth of the world's proven oil reserves. In 1988, he purchased, for £5m, Tittenhurst Park at Sunninghill, Berkshire as his English home. ==Policies and charity== At the time the British withdrew from the Persian Gulf in 1971, Zayed oversaw the establishment of the Abu Dhabi Fund for Arab Economic Development; some of its oil riches were channeled to some forty less fortunate Islamic nations in Asia and Africa during the decades that followed. Using the country's enormous oil revenues, Zayed built institutions such as hospitals, schools and universities and made it possible for UAE citizens to enjoy free access to them. He was also known for making donations to the tune of millions [pounds sterling] for worthy causes around the Arab World as well as in the neighbouring countries and in the world at large. When asked by The New York Times in April 1997 why there is no elected legislature, Zayed replied, > Why should we abandon a system that satisfies our people in order to > introduce a system that seems to engender dissent and confrontation? Our > system of government is based upon our religion and that is what our people > want. Should they seek alternatives, we are ready to listen to them. We have > always said that our people should voice their demands openly. We are all in > the same boat, and they are both the captain and the crew. Our doors are > open for any opinion to be expressed, and this well known by all our > citizens. It is our deep conviction that Allah has created people free, and > has prescribed that each individual must enjoy freedom of choice. No one > should act as if they own others. Those in the position of leadership should > deal with their subjects with compassion and understanding, because this is > the duty enjoined upon them by Allah, who enjoins upon us to treat all > living creatures with dignity. How can there be anything less for mankind, > created as Allah's successors on earth? Our system of government does not > derive its authority from man, but is enshrined in our religion and is based > on Allah's Book, the Quran. What need have we of what others have conjured > up? Its teachings are eternal and complete, while the systems conjured up by > man are transitory and incomplete. Land was also often distributed gratis (free). However, while this policy benefited many landless families, enormously wealthy clans and individuals were given free land grants in proportion to their status and influence with the royal family. His majlis (a traditional Arab consultation council) was open to the public. He allowed non-Muslim religious buildings, such as churches and a temple, to be built. Zayed was also in favour of certain rights for women, such as access to education and women's labour rights, within traditional parameters. His views regarding women's rights were considerably more liberal than his counterparts in the GCC nations. Zayed was one of the founders of the Dar Al Maal Al Islami Trust which was initiated by Saudi royal Mohammed bin Faisal Al Saud, King Faisal's son, in 1981. After floods ravaged Yemen's Ma'rib Governorate in 1982, Zayed financed the construction of the current dam of Ma'rib in 1984. This was to replace the historical one that was damaged in antiquity, and support the country's agriculture and economy. The area of Ma'rib is reportedly from where his ancestors migrated to what is now the UAE. ==Zayed Centre== Controversy over the opinions of the Zayed Centre caused the Harvard Divinity School to return Sheikh Zayed's $2.5 million gift to the institution in 2000 as "tainted money." Former United States president Jimmy Carter accepted the Zayed International Prize for the Environment in 2001. The award included a monetary prize of $500,000 from the Zayed Centre, and Carter stated in his acceptance speech that the award carried extra significance to him, since it was named after his personal friend. There was similar controversy when the London School of Economics accepted a large donation by the Zayed Centre, to build a new lecture theatre in the New Academic Building in 2008.The gift was accepted with the Sheikh Zayed Theatre being the second largest lecture hall on the campus. Harvard's equivocation, the Carter controversy, and the engendering negative publicity, prompted Sheikh Zayed to shut down the centre in August 2003, stating that the Zayed Centre "had engaged in a discourse that starkly contradicted the principles of interfaith tolerance." ==Death== On 2 November 2004, Zayed died at the age of 86. He had been suffering from diabetes and kidney problems. He was buried in the courtyard of the new Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque in Abu Dhabi. His eldest son, Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan, took an increasing role in government beginning in the 1980s. Directly after his father's death, he became the Ruler of Abu Dhabi, and was ratified as the president of the United Arab Emirates by his fellow rulers in the Supreme Council. ==Memorials and legacy== * Zayed University, a government-sponsored higher education institution with campuses in Abu Dhabi and Dubai. * Shaikh Zayed University, located in Khost, southeastern Afghanistan. It was built with the aid of Sheikh Zayed. * Sheikh Zayed City in Greater Cairo, Giza Province, Egypt, built depending on a donation from Abu Dhabi Fund for Development, on directions of Sheikh Zayed. * The Zayed International Prize for the Environment and Zayed Future Energy Prize are named in his honour. * The Kukës International Airport "Zayed- Flatrat e Veriut" in the northern city of Kukës, Albania, was named after him. * Shaikh Zayed International Airport (Rahim Yar Khan) located in Rahim Yar Khan, Punjab, Pakistan, is named in his honor. * Shaikh Zayed Medical College and Hospital located at Rahim Yar Khan, Punjab, Pakistan, was named in his honor. * Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan's Mosque, also known as Stockholm Mosque, in Stockholm, Sweden. * A lecture theater was named in his honor at the London School of Economics. * A Hafiz School in Gudermes, Chechen Republic, was named in the Sheikh's honor. * The Sheikh Zayed Arab Falconry Heritage Wing at The World Center of Birds of Prey in Boise, Idaho which was set up through a donation from Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed, son of Sheikh Zayed. * The current dam in Ma'rib is also called "Zayed Dam". * Zayed Town, located in Central Bahrain, was financed by Shaikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan and named in his honour. The first phase of this township project was inaugurated in 2001. * A street in Montenegro was named for his memory in 2013. * Shaikh Zayed Hospital for children and another for women in Larkana Sindh Pakistan. * Shaikh Zayed Hospital Lahore Punjab Pakistan, Shaikh Zayed Medical Complex Lahore. * The 5th ring road in Kuwait is now named in honor of Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan. * The Sheikh Zayed Tower at the Johns Hopkins Hospital is named in his honor. * Sheikh Zayed Hospital located at Vučitrn, Kosovo, was named in his honor. * One of the main streets of the Berges du Lac neighborhood of Tunis is named in his honor. * Sheikh Zayed Institute for Pediatric Surgical Innovation, Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC. * Sheikh Zayed Professorship of Cardiovascular Diseases at the Mayo Clinic. * Sheikh Zayed Children Welfare Centre, a centre for orphaned children located in Mombasa, Kenya. * 2018, during the Dubai Light Show, is called that year "Year of Zayed", to celebrate 100 years since his birth. === Founder's Memorial === In 2018, a year dedicated in the UAE to the celebration of Zayed's life and legacy, the Founder's Memorial was opened in Abu Dhabi. The memorial consists of an open Heritage Garden and Sanctuary Garden at the centre of which is a cubic pavilion housing The Constellation, an artwork dedicated to Zayed's memory. ==Marriage and children== Zayed bin Sultan married seven times and has 19 sons. His children are as follows: ==Ancestry== ==See also== * Champions of the Earth, 2005 award by United Nations Environment Programme ==References== ==External links== * *Farewell Arabia (1968) – Zayed and the Oil Industry in Abu Dhabi *Sheikh Zayed's website *CooperativeResearch – Zayid bin Sultan Al Nahyan *Official UAE tribute to Sheikh Zayed *Sheikh Zayed lecture theatre, in the London School of Economics Category:1918 births Category:2004 deaths Category:People from Al Ain Category:Presidents of the United Arab Emirates Category:Sheikhs of Abu Dhabi Category:Emirati billionaires Zayed bin Sultan Al Category:Kidney transplant recipients Category:20th-century Emirati people Category:Recipients of the Order of the Star of Romania Category:20th-century monarchs in the Middle East