Sheikh Ahmad Zainuddin Makhdoom bin Sheikh Muhammad Al Gazzali (Arabic: شيخ احمد زين الدين بن شيخ محمد غزالي المليباري; Ahmad Zayn al-Din ibn Muhammad al- Ghazāli al-Malibári), grandson of Sheikh Zainuddin Makhdoom I, was the writer, orator, historian, jurisprudent and spiritual leader and widely known as Zainuddin Makhdoom Second or Zaniudeen Makhdoom Al Sageer (زين الدين المخدوم الصغير) whose family originated from Yemen. He inherited the legacy of his grandfather and was installed as the Chief Qadi (judge) in the locality of Ponnani, Kerala, India, as well as appointed as the Chief Müderris (head teacher) in the historic Ponnani Dars at Ponnani Jum'ah Masjid, that built by Zainuddin Makhdoom I. ==Early life== He was born to the Makdoom family in the early months of Hijra 938 (c. 1531 CE) at Chombal, near Mahe, and received religious instruction under the supervision of his grandfather. He completed his primary education under his father Muhammed Gazzali and his uncle Abdul Azeez Bin Sheikh Makhdoom Al Avval ( عبد العزيز بن شيخ مخدوم الآول) and left for Makah for further study. He performed the Haj and settled there for ten years imbibing Islamic knowledge from exponents of Islamic law and other branches of knowledge. He received the guidance of famous scholars such as Al Hafiz Shihabuddeen bin Al Hajr Al Haithemi (الحافظ شهاب الدين بن الحجر الهيتمي), Grand Mufti of Haramain (chief jurisprudent of Makah and Madina) and commentator in Hadeeth and Fiqh, Izzuddeen bin Abdul Azeez al Zamzami (عز الدين بن عبد العزيز الزمزمي), Shiekh Abdul Rahman bin Ziyad (شيخ عبد الرحمن بن زياد) and Sayyid Abdul Rahman Al Safwi (سيد عبد الرحمن الصفوي). He gained the Tassawwuf (Sufi spiritual knowledge) from Kutub Zaban Zain Ul Arifeen Muhammed Bin Sheikh Ul Arif Abu Hasan Al Bakri (قطب الزمان زين العارفين محمد بن شيخ العارف ابو حسن البكري) and was honored with eleven Khirkath (خرقة), symbol of grade in Tareeqath. Within a short period he was hailed as the Sheikh of Qadriya Tareeqath. ==In the field of service== After the decade-long stay in Makkah, he returned to Kerala and took charge as chief Mufti in the grand Masjid of Ponnani, a position he occupied for thirty-six years. A historian recorded that his mentor Ibn Hajar Hithami had come to Ponnani and stayed there for a short period. It is said that the famous lamp made of stone, presented by Ibn Hajar Hithami, is still kept in Ponnani Dars. ===As the freedom fighter=== He did not limit himself to work as a cleric, but made many significant intervention in the political arena, keeping warm relations with the major political figures in that period. He lived during the regime of Akbar of the Mughal Empire and had a good relationship with Sultan Ali Adil Shah I, Sultan of Bijapur, as well as the Zamorin of Calicut. He was a strident advocate of freedom struggles against the imperialist power of Portugal, and motivated the youth to take part in the special army of Zamorin to defend against them. In his masterpiece Tufathul Mujahideen Fi Akhbar ul Burthugalin, he narrated the brutality of the Portuguese on the Malabar soil with special reference to their anti-Muslim stance. He used to instil in Muslim youth the necessity of holy war and the inevitability of military action against the Portuguese. In the aforementioned text, he motivated them by exuding the endless promises of the Almighty for those who waged war against them, and boosted their morale by leading their mind to the sweet memories of the golden age of Islam. ==Books by Makhdoom II== He was known for his unique command in writing in variety of subjects which includes jurisprudence, history, spirituality as well as other subjects which were distinct from other writers. The following table gives an overview of his works. No Names in English Original Name Meaning of Titles Core Subject 1 Tuhfatul Mujahedeen Fi Bali Akhbar Ul Burthugaleen تحفة المجاهدين في بعض اخبارالبرتغالين Presentation for warriors on some news related to the Portuguese History of Muslims in Kerala with special reference to the brutalities of the Portuguese invasion 2 Historia dos Portugueses no Malabar 3 Fathul Mueen Sherh Kurrathul Ain فتح المعين شرح قرة العين Fathul Mueen the annotation on Kurrathul Ain Exemplary text on Jurisprudence based on the Shafi school of thought; annotation on his own text Kurratul Ain 4 Kurrathul Ain Bi Muhimmati Ddeen قرة العين بمهمات الدين Special attention on the major religious issues Precise text on jurisprudence based on the Shafi school of thought 5 Irshadul Ibad Ila Sabeelil Rashad ارشاد العباد الى سبيل الرشاد Guidance for the slave to rectitude Spiritual text explaining the way to the Almighty 6 Ihkham Ahkam Nikah احكام احكام النكاح Consolidation on the laws related to marriage Precise explanation of the laws relating to marriage 7 Sharhu Swadr Fi Ahval ul Mautha شرح الصدور في احوال الموتى Widening of the chest in the context of the dead Spiritual text explaining the context of the afterworld; it was an annotation of the work done by Sooyoothi (السيوطي) 8 Ajvbathul Ajeebah An Asilathul Gareebah الاجوبة العجيبة عن الاسئلة الغريبة Wonderful answers for rare questions Collection of decrees issued on various issues 9 Fatawa Al Hindiyyat الفتاوى الهندية Indian decree Decree issued on the special context of southern Indian state of Kerala 10 Al Jawahir Fi Uqoobati Ahlil Kabair الجواهر في عقوبة اهل الكبائر Gems on the consequence of the culprits Spiritual text explaining the consequences for criminals 11 Al Manhajul Vadih المنهج الواضح The obvious pattern Text explaining laws relating to marriage 12 Al-Isti'dād Lil-Mawt Wa-su'āl al-Qabr الاستعداد للموت وسؤال القبر ==Demise == He died of natural causes in 1583 and was laid to rest in Mahe Kunjhippalli. His khabar lies under a tree in his native Champal. ==References== == Further reading == * Category:1531 births Category:1583 deaths Category:Sunni fiqh scholars Category:Shafi'i fiqh scholars Category:Indian independence movement Category:Writers from Kerala