Zechariah ben Abkilus (, also Zechariah ben Abqilus, Zecharya ben Avkulas, Amphikalos) was a Jewish scholar at the end of the Second Temple period. He lived in Jerusalem at the time of the destruction of the Second Temple. According to the Talmud, the authority which he enjoyed among the rabbis of Jerusalem was the cause of the downfall of the city. Zechariah was present at the banquet famous for the affair of Kamsa and Bar Kamsa;comp. Josephus, "The Life of Flavius Josephus (Vita)," § 10 and though his influence might have prevented the disgrace of Bar Ḳamsa, he did not exercise it. Later, when a calf sent by the emperor was blemished by Bar ḲamsaKass, Larry. The Story of Kamsa and Bar Kamsa. Jewish Magazine. July 1999, accessed Feb 3, 2021. prior to being received as an offering to the Temple,"Exile and Redemption: Meditations on Jewish History," Joseph Grunblatt, Ktav Publishing, 1988, p. 108 the Hillelites would have accepted it to frustrate Bar Ḳamsa, had not Zechariah, acting in the interest of the school of Shammai, ruled against, or (according to) refrained from voting and thus rendered the decision negative. The people wished to kill Bar Ḳamsa so that he should not be able to tell the emperor of the refusal, but Zechariah once more restrained them from carrying out their design. R. Johanan, on the other hand, or, according to another source, R. Jose, declared that the humility of Zechariah b. Abḳilus, in refusing to cast his vote, caused the destruction of the Temple.TB Gittin 56a:2-6 Tosefta, TB Shabbat xvi. [xvii.] 6Lamentations Rabbah iv. 2 He is recorded as following neither the Bet Hillel nor the Bet Shammai with regard to holding date-stones on the Sabbath.TB Shabbat 143a; Tosefta Shabbat l.c He is probably referred to by Josephus."The Jewish War (B. J.)" ii. 17, §§ 2-3 ==References== * Grätz, History of the Jews, iii. 458, 509, 817-819; * Derenbourg, Hist. p. 257. * By the Executive Committee of the Editorial Board, M. Seligsohn, Kaufmann Kohler Category:Talmud rabbis of the Land of Israel Category:Ancient history of Jerusalem Category:1st-century rabbis Category:Date of death unknown