Zak Thomas Gilsenan (born 8 May 2003) is a professional footballer currently playing as a midfielder for English club Blackburn Rovers. Born in Australia, he has represented Australia and the Republic of Ireland at youth international level. ==Club career== Born in Joondalup, Perth, Gilsenan started his career with local side Carramar Cougars, before joining Sorrento. In 2011, he was scouted and signed by A-League side Perth Glory. He attended a two-week training camp organised by English club Tottenham Hotspur, where he was named player of the tournament, and was invited to trial with the north- London side. During the trial, he was scouted by Spanish giants Barcelona, and would go on to move to the Catalonian side in 2012. Despite captaining the Barcelona youth teams, his parents relocated to England after two years in Spain, and Gilsenan would again go on trial, this time with Liverpool. He signed for Liverpool in 2014. He suffered a run of injuries, which eventually ended his spell in Merseyside, and despite interest from Premier League sides, he signed for Blackburn Rovers at the age of sixteen. He signed his first professional contract with Blackburn Rovers in May 2021. Later the same year, he suffered an ACL injury, which kept him out until June 2022. ==International career== Eligible to represent both Australia and the Republic of Ireland, Gilsenan has represented both at international level. He scored on his debut for the Republic of Ireland under-19s in a 2–2 draw with Sweden. ==References== Category:2003 births Category:Living people Category:Irish people of Australian descent Category:Soccer players from Perth, Western Australia Category:Republic of Ireland association footballers Category:Republic of Ireland men's youth international footballers Category:Australian soccer players Category:Australia men's youth international soccer players Category:Men's association football midfielders Category:Sorrento FC players Category:Perth Glory FC players Category:FC Barcelona players Category:Liverpool F.C. players Category:Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Category:Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Category:Irish expatriate sportspeople in Spain Category:Expatriate footballers in Spain Category:Irish expatriate sportspeople in England Category:Expatriate footballers in England